===== PAGE 33 =====

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
I I 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 24 25 
26 
27 
28 video, taken by Jonathan White, shows Pak squatting to unlock a file cabinet with Andrew White 
hovering over her and then pulling out a large check book. Andrew White demanded to see it 
and looked inside. When he noted that it belonged to Donald Norris, he snatched it from her and 
said she could not take 
it. He then roughly shut the drawer, pushing her back as he did so. In the 
process, Ms. Pak fell backward s a few inches onto her buttocks, and it appears that her hand was 
clipped by the drawer as it was shut. Andrew White did come in contact with Ms. Pak when he 
pushed the drawer shut, though he did not strike or kick her. When Andrew White proceeded to 
walk away, Pak leapt up and rushed after him. She can be seen pursuing him into the hall and 
grabbing at him, at which point the video goes black. She claims that it was after the video was 
turned off that both of the Whites pushed her into a corner of the public hallway and hit her in 
the head and kicked her with their feet and hit her in the chest, hands and face, "continuously" 
striking her. (RT /10/25, atpp. 17:12-18:15.) 
Pak testified that her hand was injured when both of the Browns grabbed her and tried to 
grab her checkbook and twisted her hand and wrist when she was outside of the office. This 
testimony is inconsistent with the video which shows that the checkbook was in Andrew 
Brown's hand when he exited the office. Pak would have had to wrestle it away from him for it 
to be in her hands. She also testified that her right hand was injured when it was slammed in the 
drawer of the file cabinet and claims that Exhibit 15514 shows injuries of her right hand. 
Although it appears the door clipped her hand, (as she made a brief intake of breath), she 
immediatel y used that same hand to grab a box, use her keys, push herself up from the floor and 
grab at Mr. Brown in the hallway. None of her fingernails were damaged in this alleged injury 
to her hand. She also did not appear to suffer any injury to her legs while still in the office and 
walked after Mr. Brown aggressively even after she fell back on the floor. 
She testified that after the incident, she was so afraid she could not leave the house. This 
testimony was impeached by photographs showing that she went back to the office -the site of 
the incident-the next day. (RT 2/10/25, at p. 27:15-28:26; RT 2/14/25, p. 127:10-129:20 and 
Exh. 1680.) Mrs. Brown, who was present in the offices on October 21, 2023, and who the 
court found to be an entirely credible witness, testified that she did not see or hear anything to 
indicate the Pak had been assaulted or injured that day. (RT 3/13/25, p. 176.) 
As stated above, the court finds Pak not to be a credible witness. She admitted to perjuring 
herself at least once and much of her testimony was evasive, incredibl e, or outright false. The 
court finds CACI 5003 particularl y instructive here, which advises the trier of fact "that if it 
decides that a witness did not tell the truth about something important , the trier of fact may 
choose not to believe anything that witness said." The court does not find credible her 
description of what happened in the hallway after the  video went black. The court does not 
believe that the Whites beat and kicked her as she testified. The court finds this testimony 
exaggerated and false. 
The court does agree that the video shows that Andrew White came in contact with Pak as he 
pushed the drawer closed, but that such conduct was not intentional and was not intended to 
harm or offend her. With respect to the threats to call the police and have her arrested, because 
she was still an employee of the Brown Law Firm, still owed a fiduciary duty to the firm, and 
Ann Brown and the Whites reasonably believed that Pak was engaging in financial misconduct, 
the Whites were within their rights when they told Pak that she could be arrested if she did not 
leave the premises. 
34 

===== END PAGE 33 =====