===== PAGE 30 =====

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 (b) Whenever a trier of fact is authorized by a statute to impose either a fine, 
or a civil penalty or other penalty, or any other remedy the purpose or effect of 
which is to punish or deter, and the amount of the fine, penalty, or other remedy is 
subject to the trier of fact's discretion, the trier of fact shall consider the factors set 
forth in paragraphs (1) to (3), inclusive, in addition to other appropriat e factors, in 
determining the amount of fine, civil penalty or other penalty, or other remedy to 
impose. Whenever the trier of fact makes an affirmative finding in regard to one 
or more of the factors set forth in paragraph s (1) to (3), inclusive, it may impose a 
fine, civil penalty or other penalty, or other remedy in an amount up to three times 
greater than authorized by the statute, or, where the statute does not authorize a 
specific amount, up to three times greater than the amount the trier of fact would 
impose in the absence of that affirmative finding. 
( 1) Whether the defendant knew or should have known that their conduct was 
directed to one or more senior citizens, disabled persons, or veterans. 
(2) Whether the defendant's conduct caused one or more senior citizens, 
disabled persons, or veterans to suffer: loss or encumbrance of a primary 
residence, principal employment, or source of income; substantial loss of property 
set aside for retirement, or for personal or family care and maintenance; or 
substantial loss of payments received under a pension or retirement plan or a 
government benefits program, or assets essential to the health or welfare of the 
senior citizen, disabled person, or veteran. 
(3) Whether one or more senior citizens, disabled persons, or veterans are 
substantially more vulnerable than other members of the public to the defendant's 
conduct because of age, poor health or infirmity, impaired understanding , 
restricted mobility, or disability, and actually suffered substantial physical, 
emotional , or economic damage resulting from the defendant's conduct. 
While the language of the statute is broad, on its face it only allows for treble damages where 
the trier of fact has imposed a fine, civil penalty or other penalty to deter conduct. (Clark v. 
Superior Court (2010) 50 Cal.4th 605. 614 ("trebled recovery may be awarded under Civil Code 
section 3345, subdivision (b) only if the statute under which recovery is sought permits a remedy 
that is in the nature of a penalty"). Because the court has declined to award any punitive 
damages and no statutory penalty is available under the Elder Abuse Act, the court cannot award 
any enhancement under Section 3345. 
H. Quantum Meruit 
Plaintiff presented Carole Buckner as an expert witness on some of the legal ethics issues 
presented in this case. Buckner has extensive experience as an expert in the field of legal ethics 
and was accepted by the court as an expert in the field. (RT 3/4/25, at p. 16-21.) 
Buckner opined that an attorney who has notice of a lien in favor of prior counsel on the case 
is obligated under California Rule of Professional Conduct 1.15 to notify all effected parties of 
the lien and to retain the funds in the attorney's client trust account if there is a dispute about 
disbursement of such funds. (Id., at p. 22: 1-23:28.) She testified that the mere fact that an 
attorney had been suspended does not nullify a lien held by the attorney's law firm. (Id., at p. 
31 

===== END PAGE 30 =====