===== PAGE 39 =====

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 the property of the Norris firm (RT 3/14/25, J. White, cross, 32:2-34:28; 55: 1-63:4). Mr. Norris 
objected in time and advised the parties that his active client files were stored on those systems 
(Ex. 15558). Even if some of the data had once belonged to the Brown Law Firm, some of the 
data certainly belonged exclusively to the Norris Law Firm. 
Penal Code Section 502 provides: "In addition to any other civil remedy available , the owner 
or lessee of the computer, computer system, computer network, computer program, or data who 
suffers damage or loss by reason of a violation of any of the provision s of subdivision ( c) may 
bring a civil action against the violator for compensatory damages and injunctive relief or other 
equitable relief. Compensatory damages shall include any expenditure reasonably and 
necessarily incurred by the owner or lessee to verify that a computer system, computer network, 
computer program, or data was or was not altered, damaged, or deleted by the access. 
The court finds that the contents of the four storage files maintained by Ann Brown must be 
immediately returned to Norris, as well as all of the computers in the office at the time of the 
take over. With respect to the issue of damages, the court finds that the loss described above is 
also recoverable under Section 502, specifically, the cost of staff to attempt to restore the files, 
the costs of the computers, or a total of $26,445.75. These expenses can only be recovered once. 
The remainder of the damages established for conversion are unrelated to unlawful access to the 
computers and so are not recoverable under Section 502. The claimed damages related to the 
lost leads are not recoverable for the reasons stated above. 
3. Liability of Andrew and Jonathan White for Conversion and Violation of Pena 
Code Section 502 
Cross-defendants Jonathan and Andrew White contend that they cannot be liable to cross­
complainants for damages caused by their clients' entry into the office and retention of case files. 
The court agrees that that their conduct was committed in good faith, based on a genuine, albeit 
mistaken belief, that Baird Brown's office and case files had been commandeered by Donald 
Norris and Michele Pak, without Brown's knowledge of consent. Under the agency immunity 
doctrine, the Whites cannot be liable "to third persons for acts committed in good faith in 
performance of professional activities as an attorney for his client." (Roberts v. Ball, Hunt, Harl, 
Brown & Baerwitz (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 104, 109.) Norris and Pak did not establish that the 
Whites' conduct was "actuated by malicious motives," or that they "shared in the illegal motives 
of [their] clients." (Id., at p. 109.) On the contrary, at all times the Whites were acting solely as 
attorneys on behalf of their client, who they reasonably believed had been deceived . The court 
also agrees with cross-defendant s that Norris and Pak did not establish any of the exceptions to 
this agency immunity doctrine: there was no or insufficient evidence that the Whites engaged in 
any fraud, or that they conspired with the Browns, or that they received any financial gain 
because of their activities. At most, Pak and Norris established that the Whites, at some point, 
discovered or reasonably should have discovered that some of the files they had sequestered 
probably belonged solely to the Norris law firm. But their conduct in requesting that Norris 
provide them a I ist of clients whose files needed to be returned was not unreasonable and was
taken to protect the Browns from claims that they had not returned Norris's client files. Thus, 
the Brown's failure to return cases files was done solely to protect the client and not for the 
personal benefit of the attorneys. Accordingly, judgment should be entered in favor of the 
White defendants on the cross-complaint. 
40 

===== END PAGE 39 =====