===== PAGE 22 =====

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 had taken or converted personal property in the suiteof offices out of which Norris and Pak 
worked. In any event, there was no specific evidence presented as to any particular items of 
personal property which were converted; thus, any such claim would fail as well. 
2. Jnterferellce with contractual relations between Brown Law Firm and its clients. 
For the same reasons discussed above, the court finds that plaintiffs have failed to 
establish by a preponderance of the evidence that defendant s wrongfully interfered with the 
agreements between the Brown Law Firm and its clients. Baird Brown voluntarily decided to 
withdraw from representation on the cases at issue here, to substitute the Norris Firm as counsel 
on those cases and to transfer any cases which were just at their outset to the new firm. Thus, 
there could be no interference with relations, since Baird Brown himself had decided to 
terminate those relationships. 
3. Unfair Business Practices 
Plaintiffs contend that defendant s engaged in unfair competition, both at common law 
and in violation of Business & Professions Code §§ 17200, et seq., by 1) Using fraud and deceit 
to steal Brown Law clients; 2) Appropriating the services of staff personnel on Brown Law's 
payroll; 3) Appropriating use of Brown Law's exclusive offices, Suite 980; 4) Using 
BrownLaw 's address and phone number for the Norris/Pak Firm; 5) Incorporating a headshot 
and the professional background of Brown into the new website for the Norris/Pak Firm 
(dnorrislaw.com); and 6) Passing off Norris as being closely associated with Brown Law. 
As stated above, there was insufficient evidence presented to support a claim for unfair 
competition based on alleged theft of Brown Law clients. The court also finds that there was 
insufficient evidence that the Norris firm appropriated the services of staff personnel, used the 
Brown law office suite, or used the Brown Law Firm address and phone number. The court finds 
that Brown gave permission to Pak and Norris to use his staff, office suite, and office phone, at 
the same time that Brown required Pak to use the suite and staff to finish up his remaining cases. 
Brown had access to the financial books, the office, the case files (through SugarSync) , and the 
court records (through Pacer and other means), which would have clearly revealed to him that 
work was being done out of the suite by Norris and Pak, starting as early as his suspension in 
April 2020. The court concludes that Brown accepted this arrangement. To the extent that 
Brown believes and now claims that office expenses , staff time, and rent should have been paid 
by the Norris office, either in whole or in some shared manner, no evidence was presented by 
plaintiffs to quantify any costs (payroll, rent or otherwise) that they paid, which should have 
been paid by the Norris firm, at least through October 21, 2023 There was no evidence that 
Brown continued to put any money into the firm after April 2020. Pak testified that she did put 
money into the business account or otherwise paid office expenses herself. Given this record, 
the court finds plaintiffs have failed to establish unfair competition as a result of Norris and 
Pak's use of the staff and the physical office, address and phone number through October 21, 
2023. 
However, plaintiffs did establish that Pak negotiated a reduction in the lease which 
included a balloon payment, which Brown has been left to pay, despite the fact that Pak and 
Norris benefited from the reduction in rent through the end of October 2023. As discussed 
further below, the court finds that plaintiffs have established that Pak breached her fiduciary du 
23 

===== END PAGE 22 =====