===== PAGE 40 =====

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 25 
26 
27 
28 4. Damages pursuant to Penal Code Section 496(c). 
Cross-comp lainants also seek treble damages pursuant to Penal Code Section 496(c), 
which provides that "[e]very person who buys or receives any property that has been stolen or 
that has been obtained in any manner constituting theft or extortion, knowing the property to be 
so stolen or obtained, or who conceals, sells, withholds , or aids in concealing, selling, or 
withholding any property from the owner, knowing the property to be so stolen or obtained," is 
subject to incarceration. Subdivision (c) states that any person who has been injured by a 
violation of section 496(a) "may bring an action for three times the amount of actual damages, if 
any, sustained by the plaintiff, costs of suit, and reasonable attorney's fees." 
While the language is broad, the Supreme Court has clarified that treble damages and 
attorney fees are only available in cases which constitute criminal theft. (Siry Investment , L.P. v. 
Farkhondehpour (2022) 13 Cal.5th 333, 361.) The court explained, "not all commercial or 
consumer disputes alleging that a defendant obtained money or property through fraud, 
misrepresentation, or breach of a contractual promise will amount to a theft. To prove theft, a 
plaintiff must establish criminal intent on the part of the defendant beyond "mere proof of 
nonperformance or actual falsity." (People v. Ashley (1954) 42 Cal.2d 246,264,267 P.2d 271.). 
... If misrepresentations or unfulfilled promises "are made innocently or inadvertently, they can 
no more form the basis for a prosecution for obtaining property by false pretenses than can an 
innocent breach of contract." (Id., at p. 264,267 P.2d 271.)" (Siry at p. 361.) In Siry, the record 
approved an award of treble damages because the evidence was "consistent with a conclusion 
that defendants acted not innocently or inadvertently, but with careful planning and deliberation 
reflecting the requisite criminal intent." (Id.) 
In the instant case, cross-complainants have not establ ished anything approaching 
criminal intent on the part of the Browns ( or the Whites). In the court's opinion, Baird Brown di 
not appear to have the mental faculties to possess criminal intent; he persuaded the court that he 
truly believes that all of the cases are his and that he was betrayed by Pak and Norris. His wife 
and his attorneys reasonably believed in the summer and fall of 2023 that Baird Brown had been 
the victim of fraud and elder abuse by his trusted office manager and Norris. They did not know 
and could not know the communications which had occurred between Norris and Brown in 2019 
as Brown had hidden that information from his wife due to his embarrassment that he was giving 
up the practice of law and facing a year long suspension. Thus, their conduct in seizing the 
computers and files was not unreasonable on October 21, 2023. Thereafter, the parties took lega 
positions as to whether the files should be returned en masse and uncopied or whether the White 
and Ms. Brown had to retain a copy to protect themselves from being accused of destroying files 
Based on this stalemate between the various attorneys involved, the files remained locked up in 
storage shed and this litigation unfolded. This sad situation is many things, but it is not crirnina 
theft. According ly, cross-complainants request for treble damages and attorney fees is denied. 
4. Punitive Damages 
Cross-complainants failed to establish that cross-defendants acted with malice, fraud or 
oppression. Although the court finds that the Browns and their counsel should not have 
withheld files from Norris, the court finds that the decisions which led up to their entry into the 
office and retention of files were based on misinformation supplied by Baird Brown due to his 
own failing memory and cognitive function. The court finds that by the fall of 2023, Brown had 
forgotten that he had transferred many of his cases to Norris, that he had blessed Pak's work wit 
41 

===== END PAGE 40 =====