I think I need a better set of rules for what the TONE system provides for player actions and choices. First of all, the choice is not always going to be dialogue. Like O [observation] often would entail not saying anything at all but just taking in the scene. (So in the first encounter with Ravi and Nima. an "O" option might be to "(Look down in thought)" Nima (being the less trusting one) might view this as a the player Ignoring the couple and say something like "What do you want anyway, we don't trust outsiders." Player sensing the hostility has more choices T "I'm trying to find work, I'm new here," O "I don't mean to make you all feel uncomfortable, its been a long trip, any place to rest." Narrative presence is an area I'm unclear about the affect it has on NPC REMNANTS stats though implies its about how the player sort of asserts themselves since it raises [A] Authority, [R] Resolve; lowers [N] Nuance. If that's the case the N response would be "I've heard the market is a place to find work. I'm not here to cause trouble." E response "You seem apprehensive, I worked on a farm before I just want to be useful."

Ravi is more trusting but defers to his wife Nima. Ravi: "You should be careful about who you reveal yourself to, there's been some 'activity' lately..." "The buildings are...unstable... (he looks down and off to the distance." "Our daughter..." Nima interrupts him "Ravi, take your own advice, this one might be working for those thieves. Come back later." Ravi responds again "Nima...I can't have someone else...anyway be careful." This is the first time the player learns their names. 

Player choices: T - "You are right to be weary of me. I want to earn your trust." O - "It's not my business but...Did something happen to your daughter?" N - "I've had some...losses...I don't need you to get into details." E - "I don't know what happened to your daughter but you seem really...impacted. I...just want to learn what I can. Let me know if I can help with something."

This is where I get a little lost between how to have dialogue and story, and how to get the player on a quest to find the Glyph of Sorrow. 

Maybe after the last round of player choices, they notice the device they got from Saori is glowing. They tap the screen and it prompts them that something is close by. The player excuses themselves and thinks "This thing...I need to figure out what this is." The mechanism I think is that it acts as a sort of metal detector, the pulsing gets faster and brighter as they get closer to a glyph signature. 